{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Cepheids
\f1\b0  = pulsating variable stars named after their prototype, 
\f0\b \uc0\u948  Cephei
\f1\b0  (Delta Cephei) in the constellation 
\f0\b Cepheus
\f1\b0 . Like Mira, it's not an acronym \'97 it's a class named after the namesake.\
The discovery history is worth knowing because it shaped 20th-century cosmology:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 1784
\f1\b0  \'97 John Goodricke, a deaf English astronomer working in York, discovered that \uc0\u948  Cephei varied in brightness with a period of ~5.4 days. He died at age 21, two weeks after being elected to the Royal Society for this and related work.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 1908\'961912
\f1\b0  \'97 Henrietta Swan Leavitt, working as a "computer" at Harvard College Observatory cataloging variable stars on photographic plates of the Magellanic Clouds, noticed that the brighter Cepheids in the SMC had longer periods. Crucially, because they were all at roughly the same distance (the SMC), this was a 
\f0\b period\'96luminosity relation
\f1\b0 : log P maps directly to absolute magnitude. This is the 
\f0\b Leavitt Law
\f1\b0 , and it turned Cepheids from astronomical curiosities into the first cosmological standard candles.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 1923
\f1\b0  \'97 Edwin Hubble identified Cepheids in M31 (Andromeda), measured their periods, applied Leavitt's relation, and showed M31 was far outside the Milky Way \'97 settling the "Great Debate" about whether spiral nebulae were extragalactic. This is the founding measurement of extragalactic astronomy.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 1929
\f1\b0  \'97 Hubble used Cepheid distances to nearby galaxies plus their recession velocities to derive the linear distance\'96velocity relation that bears his name (and Lema\'eetre's, who got there first in 1927).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 So Cepheids are arguably 
\f2\i the
\f1\i0  original rung of the cosmological distance ladder; everything else descends from this lineage.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 The physics in one breath:
\f1\b0  Cepheids are post-main-sequence stars (~3\'9620 M\uc0\u9737 ) crossing the 
\f0\b instability strip
\f1\b0  in the H\'96R diagram during core-He-burning or shell-burning phases. The pulsation is driven by the 
\f0\b \uc0\u954 -mechanism
\f1\b0  in a partial helium ionization zone: when the star compresses, He II becomes He III, opacity rises, radiation gets trapped, pressure builds, and the star expands. As it expands, the zone cools, He recombines, opacity drops, radiation escapes, the star cools and contracts, and the cycle repeats. The period is set by the dynamical timescale of the envelope, which scales with the star's mean density \'97 and since more luminous stars are larger and less dense, you get a clean P\'96L relation. Periods range ~1\'96100 days; luminosities range from ~300 to ~100,000 L\uc0\u9737 .\

\f0\b Why Cepheids are the workhorse for H\uc0\u8320 :
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	1	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Tight P\'96L relation.
\f1\b0  In the near-IR (especially HST F160W and JWST F150W), the scatter is ~0.08\'960.12 mag \'97 comparable to or better than any other primary distance indicator. Multi-wavelength observations (the "Wesenheit" reddening-free magnitudes) tighten this further.\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	2	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Bright and abundant.
\f1\b0  A long-period Cepheid (~30 days) reaches M_V ~ \uc0\u8722 5 to \u8722 6, visible with HST out to ~40 Mpc \'97 well into the SN Ia calibrator regime. Each suitable spiral host typically yields tens to hundreds of usable Cepheids, giving small statistical errors per host.\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	3	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Multiple geometric anchors.
\f1\b0  Cepheid absolute magnitudes can be calibrated independently via (a) Milky Way Cepheid parallaxes from Gaia, (b) detached eclipsing binaries in the LMC and SMC, and (c) the maser distance to NGC 4258. Three methodologically independent zero-points reduce systematic risk on the first rung.\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	4	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Same instrument, all rungs.
\f1\b0  SH0ES observes Cepheids with HST WFC3 in NGC 4258, the LMC (via OGLE-IV ground-based + HST follow-up), and the 42 SN Ia hosts using the 
\f2\i same
\f1\i0  filters (F555W, F814W, F160W). Differential photometry cancels almost all flux-calibration zero-point uncertainty.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 The systematics that get debated:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Crowding/blending.
\f1\b0  Cepheids live in star-forming regions of spiral arms \'97 exactly the dustiest, most crowded environments. HST's PSF is wide enough that nearby unresolved companions can contribute spurious flux. SH0ES handles this with artificial-star tests; CCHP critics have argued the corrections are imperfect. JWST's much sharper PSF (and Riess et al. 2024's JWST validation of HST Cepheid photometry) has substantially mollified this concern.\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Metallicity dependence.
\f1\b0  The P\'96L relation slope and zero-point depend on metallicity ([Fe/H] or O/H), and SN Ia hosts span a range. The metallicity term is empirically fit but introduces a few-percent systematic.\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Reddening/dust.
\f1\b0  Mitigated by working in NIR (F160W) and using Wesenheit indices that combine optical + NIR to cancel the average reddening law.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Population context:
\f1\b0  Cepheids are 
\f0\b Population I
\f1\b0  \'97 young (10\uc0\u8311 \'9610\u8312  yr), metal-rich, found in spiral disks. This is the key contrast with TRGB stars, JAGB stars, Miras, and RR Lyrae, all of which are older Pop-II\'96ish or intermediate-age tracers. The Pop-I/Pop-II distinction in the H0DN figure is largely a Cepheid-vs-everything-else distinction at the second rung, and the fact that all of them currently land at H\u8320  \u8776  73\'9675 (with CCHP TRGB at 70 the lone outlier) is what makes the Hubble tension hard to dissolve via "secret stellar-population systematic."\
A subtype note that occasionally matters: there are actually 
\f0\b two
\f1\b0  Cepheid families. 
\f0\b Classical Cepheids
\f1\b0  (Type I, \uc0\u948  Cephei type) are the young Pop-I objects everyone means in H\u8320  work. 
\f0\b Type II Cepheids
\f1\b0  (W Virginis type, BL Herculis type) are old, low-mass, Pop-II stars with the same period range but ~1.5 mag fainter \'97 historically the cause of Hubble's factor-of-2 H\uc0\u8320  error before Walter Baade sorted out the populations in 1952. In modern SH0ES-style analyses, only classical Cepheids are used, and contamination is screened out by color and amplitude cuts.\
}