{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f4\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f5\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande-Bold;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
FP = Fundamental Plane
\f1\b0 , a distance indicator for 
\f0\b early-type galaxies (ellipticals and S0s)
\f1\b0 , discovered independently in 1987 by 
\f0\b Djorgovski & Davis
\f1\b0  and by 
\f0\b Dressler, Lynden-Bell, Burstein, Davies, Faber, Terlevich & Wegner
\f1\b0  (the "Seven Samurai"). It plays a sister role to Tully\'96Fisher: TF for spirals, FP for ellipticals.\

\f0\b The core idea:
\f1\b0  elliptical galaxies are not a one-parameter family \'97 their properties don't all scale together along a single sequence. But three observable quantities turn out to lie on a remarkably tight two-dimensional plane in three-dimensional parameter space:\
$$\\log R_e = a \\log \\sigma + b \\langle \\mu_e \\rangle + c$$\
where:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
$R_e$ is the 
\f0\b effective radius
\f1\b0  (half-light radius), in arcseconds 
\f2\i as observed
\f1\i0 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
$\\sigma$ is the 
\f0\b central stellar velocity dispersion
\f1\b0 , in km/s\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
$\\langle \\mu_e \\rangle$ is the 
\f0\b mean surface brightness within $R_e$
\f1\b0 , in mag/arcsec\'b2\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
$a, b, c$ are empirically calibrated coefficients (typically $a \\approx 1.2$, $b \\approx 0.3$ in the optical)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Of these, $\\sigma$ and $\\langle \\mu_e \\rangle$ are 
\f0\b distance-independent
\f1\b0  \'97 they're physical properties you measure regardless of how far away the galaxy sits. But $R_e$ in arcseconds is 
\f2\i angular
\f1\i0 , so converting to a physical size requires the distance. Flip the equation around: if you know the FP coefficients (calibrated on galaxies of known distance), you can predict the 
\f2\i physical
\f1\i0  effective radius from the velocity dispersion and surface brightness, then compare to the 
\f2\i angular
\f1\i0  effective radius to read off the distance.\

\f0\b Why the plane exists physically:
\f1\b0  It falls out of the 
\f0\b virial theorem
\f1\b0  plus the assumption that ellipticals form a roughly homologous family. Virial equilibrium gives $M \\sim \\sigma^2 R / G$. If mass-to-light ratio scales weakly with mass ($M/L \\propto M^\{0.2\}$, say) and the stellar populations don't vary too wildly, you get a tight relation among $R$, $\\sigma$, and $L$ (and hence surface brightness). The "tilt" of the FP relative to the pure virial prediction is a long-standing area of study \'97 it encodes dark matter fractions, structural non-homology, and stellar population gradients across the elliptical sequence.\

\f0\b Practical procedure:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Get high-S/N imaging of the target elliptical 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  fit a S\'e9rsic or de Vaucouleurs profile 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  extract $R_e$ (in arcsec) and $\\langle \\mu_e \\rangle$.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Get a moderate-resolution spectrum of the central few arcsec 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  measure $\\sigma$ from absorption-line broadening (Mg b, Ca H+K, etc.).\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Apply the calibrated FP coefficients to predict the physical $R_e$.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Distance modulus follows from the angular vs physical size comparison.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Strengths:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Reaches very far.
\f1\b0  Spectroscopic dispersions are measurable for ellipticals out to ~250 Mpc with current ground-based facilities (and ~500+ Mpc with stacked DESI/4MOST data) \'97 much further than any rung-2 calibrator. This puts FP cleanly in the Hubble flow where peculiar velocities are negligible compared to recessional velocities.\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Huge samples available.
\f1\b0  Ellipticals are common in galaxy clusters and can be observed in bulk via spectroscopic surveys. 
\f0\b DESI's recent FP catalogue
\f1\b0  has >10
\f4 \uc0\u8310 
\f1  early-type galaxies; 
\f0\b 6dFGS, SDSS, GAMA
\f1\b0  all contribute.\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Different host population from TF.
\f1\b0  FP gets you ellipticals; TF gets you spirals. Combining them samples the velocity field much more completely.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Weaknesses:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The intrinsic scatter is ~20% per galaxy
\f1\b0  in distance \'97 significantly larger than TF's ~15% per galaxy, and much larger than SN Ia's ~7%. So you need large samples to beat down statistical noise.\
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Calibration is hard.
\f1\b0  Few ellipticals host Cepheids or have measurable TRGB at useful distances; those that do tend to be S0s in groups. Most FP calibrations therefore rely on 
\f0\b SBF distances to nearby ellipticals
\f1\b0 , which means FP inherits SBF's calibration uncertainties and isn't independent of the SBF rung.\
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Aperture corrections.
\f1\b0  Velocity dispersion depends on the aperture used (fiber size, slit width), and you have to standardize across heterogeneous spectroscopic data sets \'97 a non-trivial systematic.\
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The "tilt" and environmental dependences
\f1\b0  are still debated. Cluster vs field ellipticals have slightly different FP coefficients; using the wrong one introduces a systematic.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Where FP lives in the H0DN figure:
\f1\b0 \
FP is the 
\f0\b third-rung connector for the Coma cluster and other rich clusters
\f1\b0 . The path goes:\
Anchors 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  SBF distances to nearby ellipticals 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  FP zero-point calibration 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  FP distances to Coma + many groups/clusters 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  relative recessional velocities 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f1 \
The caption for Figure 1 explicitly notes "Unlabeled tick marks represent groups (Fornax & Virgo for the TRGB to SBF, 
\f0\b Coma for FP
\f1\b0 )". Coma is the workhorse here because it's a populous cluster (~1000+ ellipticals), well into the Hubble flow at ~7000 km/s, and has been imaged and spectroscoped extensively \'97 so FP can be calibrated with high statistical power.\

\f0\b The recent DESI\'96FP measurement:
\f1\b0 \
The most prominent FP
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f1 H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f1  result on the figure (the "
\f0\b DESI
\f1\b0 " reference, Said et al. 2025) uses ~10
\f4 \uc0\u8309 
\f1  early-type galaxies from DESI's spectroscopic survey to apply the Fundamental Plane in bulk, anchored via SBF and the cluster network. This is a large-sample successor to Kourkchi+20's CF4 TF measurement, exploiting the fact that DESI's spectroscopy makes FP statistically competitive with TF for the first time at large scale. The headline value lands around 
\f0\b H
\f5 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  \uc0\u8776  76
\f1\b0 , on the high-H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f1  side of the tension, with systematics dominated by SBF zero-point and peculiar-velocity corrections.\
}