{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid2\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 JAGB = J-band Asymptotic Giant Branch
\f1\b0  (sometimes also written "JAGB stars" or "the JAGB method").\
The "J" refers to the 
\f0\b near-infrared J-band photometric filter
\f1\b0  (~1.25 \uc0\u956 m), which is where these stars are observed and where the standard-candle property emerges. The "AGB" is the 
\f0\b Asymptotic Giant Branch
\f1\b0  \'97 the late-life evolutionary phase for low-to-intermediate mass stars (~0.8\'968 M\uc0\u9737 ) after core helium burning ends, where they burn H and He in alternating shells around an inert C/O core.\
Specifically, the JAGB method uses 
\f0\b carbon-rich AGB stars
\f1\b0  (carbon stars, or C-stars) \'97 a subset of the thermally-pulsing AGB population that has dredged up enough carbon from interior nucleosynthesis to flip the surface C/O ratio above 1. This matters because:\

\f0\b The standard-candle physics in one breath:
\f1\b0  Carbon stars in the thermally-pulsing AGB phase occupy a remarkably narrow range of luminosities in the near-infrared J-band \'97 roughly M_J \uc0\u8776  \u8722 6.2 mag with ~0.2 mag scatter \'97 across a wide range of metallicities and host environments. The reason is a fortunate conspiracy: lower-luminosity AGB stars don't dredge up enough carbon to become C-stars, while higher-luminosity ones experience hot bottom burning that converts the carbon back to nitrogen. So the C-star population gets "sandwich-trimmed" at both ends, leaving a narrow luminosity strip that's nicely visible in J-band photometry of any galaxy with an intermediate-age population.\
The method as a distance indicator was developed primarily by 
\f0\b Barry Madore and Wendy Freedman
\f1\b0  (~2020 and following), explicitly as a 
\f2\i third
\f1\i0  leg of the CCHP program \'97 alongside Cepheids (Pop-I) and TRGB (oldest Pop-II) \'97 to provide a population-independent cross-check on H\uc0\u8320 .\

\f0\b Why it matters for the H0DN figure:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	1	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Different stars from everything else on the ladder.
\f1\b0  Cepheids = young Pop-I; TRGB = old Pop-II RGB tip; Miras = O-rich AGB; JAGB = C-rich AGB. Four distinct stellar populations, four largely orthogonal sets of systematics (metallicity sensitivity, dust, crowding, age priors).\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	2	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 JWST-friendly.
\f1\b0  The J-band sits right where JWST/NIRCam's F115W filter is sensitive, and JAGB stars are bright enough in the NIR that JWST can detect them out to ~30 Mpc \'97 comparable to the SH0ES SN Ia calibrator sample. This is why JAGB has gone from a niche method to a central player in the post-JWST era.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	3	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 It's the third pillar of the CCHP H\uc0\u8320  measurement.
\f1\b0  Freedman et al. 2025 quote three values:\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl1
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 TRGB only (HST + JWST):
\f1\b0  H\uc0\u8320  = 70.39 \'b1 1.87\
\ls1\ilvl1
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 TRGB only (JWST):
\f1\b0  H\uc0\u8320  = 68.81 \'b1 ~2.2\
\ls1\ilvl1
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 JAGB only (JWST):
\f1\b0  H\uc0\u8320  = 67.80 \'b1 ~2.7\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	4	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Notice the JAGB result lands a bit lower than TRGB, both lower than SH0ES. That internal CCHP consistency between TRGB and JAGB \'97 both anchored to NGC 4258 via independent physics \'97 is part of what Freedman & Madore point to when arguing that the high-H\uc0\u8320  side is driven by Cepheid systematics. Riess and collaborators counter with Riess et al. 2024 (JWST cross-validation), which found JAGB \u8776  72.2 \'b1 2.2 \'97 i.e., consistent with their Cepheid value of 73.4 \'97 when applied to the SH0ES SN Ia host sample.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The CCHP-vs-SH0ES JAGB disagreement (67.8 vs 72.2 from JWST observations of overlapping galaxies) is currently one of the live methodological battles in the H\uc0\u8320  tension literature: it boils down to choices about the JAGB sample selection (which color/magnitude cuts isolate "clean" carbon stars), photometric processing, and which subset of SN Ia hosts gets included. The H0DN framework is in part designed to expose exactly these choices through the variant table rather than burying them in single-number systematic error bars.\
So when you see "JAGB" in the figure, it's physically a third near-infrared standard candle on the calibrator rung \'97 an old-population analog to TRGB, methodologically simpler in some ways (just J-band photometry, no time-domain monitoring like Miras need), but currently the source of the most active disagreement between the CCHP and SH0ES camps.\
}