{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-BoldItalic;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid701\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid8}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  Megamaser Cosmology Project, H\uc0\u8322 O megamaser disks in AGN, six Hubble-flow galaxies giving H\u8320  = 73.9 \'b1 3.0 (Pesce+20), with NGC 4258 serving as the geometric anchor for the wider distance ladder. We've also touched on masers in cosmology more broadly and on parallax. Now that we've worked through the full H0DN landscape, let me give you the full picture of MCP \'97 what it actually does observationally, why the precision is what it is, what the failure modes are, and how it sits in the H\u8320  ecosystem.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs36 \cf0 The observational program in detail\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 MCP is, mechanically, a 
\f1\b multi-decade VLBI monitoring campaign
\f0\b0 . The collaboration (lead PI James Braatz, with Jim Moran, Mark Reid, Cheng-Yu Kuo, Dom Pesce, Jenny Greene, Christian Henkel, and others across NRAO, CfA, Princeton, MPIfR, and elsewhere) operates as follows:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Step 1: Single-dish search.
\f0\b0  Use the GBT (Green Bank, 100m), Effelsberg (100m), or comparable single-dish facilities to survey AGN at 22 GHz looking for H\uc0\u8322 O megamaser emission. Roughly 5,500 galaxies have been surveyed; ~150 H\u8322 O megamasers detected; ~25 with disk-like spectral signatures (the characteristic "triple peak" of systemic + high-velocity red + high-velocity blue features); ~10 amenable to VLBI mapping.\

\f1\b Step 2: VLBI mapping.
\f0\b0  Image the maser distribution at sub-milliarcsecond resolution using the VLBA (and sometimes the EVN or HSA for sensitivity). This resolves individual maser spots and shows their spatial distribution \'97 for the disk systems you see a thin, edge-on Keplerian rotator with maser spots distributed in a position-velocity pattern that traces the disk geometry.\

\f1\b Step 3: Long-term monitoring.
\f0\b0  Use the GBT to track each maser's velocity over years. The systemic features (the maser spots near zero rotational velocity) drift in line-of-sight velocity at a rate $a_\{||\}$ that is essentially the centripetal acceleration projected onto the line of sight. For typical disk radii, $a_\{||\} \\sim 1\'9610$ km/s/yr \'97 measurable with year-baseline monitoring at the 0.1 km/s/yr level.\

\f1\b Step 4: Geometric modeling.
\f0\b0  Fit a warped, slightly eccentric Keplerian disk to the combined position\'96velocity\'96acceleration data. The best-fit disk has parameters: black hole mass, disk radius, inclination, position angle, warp parameters, eccentricity. Once the disk is geometrically determined, the linear-vs-angular size ratio gives the angular diameter distance.\
This pipeline is conceptually clean but observationally very intensive. 
\f1\b A single MCP distance takes ~5\'9610 years of GBT monitoring + multiple VLBA epochs
\f0\b0 . The six published galaxies represent decades of accumulated effort.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs36 \cf0 Why the precision is what it is\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 The headline MCP number, 73.9 \'b1 3.0, has a 4% uncertainty. Let's be specific about where that comes from:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 For NGC 4258 alone
\f0\b0  (the gold-standard anchor, not a Hubble-flow target):\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Distance: $D = 7.576 \\pm 0.082$ Mpc (1.1% precision; Reid+19)\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 This is dominated by the maser disk geometry uncertainty, not by anything peculiar-velocity related.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The 1.1% NGC 4258 precision is the 
\f1\b floor
\f0\b0  for what MCP can do per galaxy on a really well-studied target.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 For Hubble-flow MCP galaxies
\f0\b0  (the six that contribute to H\uc0\u8320 ):\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Per-galaxy distance precision: ~3\'9610%, depending on quality of maser data.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Per-galaxy peculiar velocity uncertainty: ~250 km/s.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 For a galaxy at $cz \\sim 5000$ km/s, this is 5% in H\uc0\u8320 .\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 For a galaxy at $cz \\sim 10,000$ km/s, this is 2.5% in H\uc0\u8320 .\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 When you combine 6 galaxies, the 
\f2\i statistical
\f0\i0  precision should be ~1.7%. The actual quoted precision is 4%. 
\f1\b The factor of ~2 difference is the systematic floor
\f0\b0 , which Pesce+20 estimate by varying the peculiar velocity treatment, the disk model parameterization, and the inclusion/exclusion of individual galaxies.\
The variation across PV models is striking: H\uc0\u8320  ranges from 
\f1\b 71.8 to 76.9
\f0\b0  depending on which PV correction prescription you use. The \'b13.0 quoted error bar is wide enough to span this range; a more precise central value would require either more galaxies (reducing PV-induced scatter) or better-constrained PV models in the local volume.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs36 \cf0 What MCP is 
\f3\i not
\f1\i0  limited by\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 It's worth being explicit about what is 
\f1\b not
\f0\b0  the dominant systematic, because this is where MCP differs from other methods:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 1. Stellar physics: not relevant.
\f0\b0  MCP doesn't use any stars. No standard candles, no PLR, no metallicity sensitivity, no crowding, no extinction.\

\f1\b 2. Standard candle assumptions: not relevant.
\f0\b0  No SN Ia, no Cepheid, no TRGB. Each maser galaxy is a self-contained geometric measurement.\

\f1\b 3. Calibration zero-points: not relevant.
\f0\b0  No anchor distance feeds in. The only calibrations are the AU (well-known) and trigonometric measurements of disk geometry.\

\f1\b 4. Instrument cross-calibration: not relevant.
\f0\b0  MCP doesn't combine HST + JWST + ground-based + space-based; it's all 22 GHz radio observations from the VLBA + GBT.\

\f1\b 5. Photometric systems: not relevant.
\f0\b0  No magnitudes, no photometric system, no zero-points, no transformations.\
This unusual property \'97 being limited 
\f2\i only
\f0\i0  by disk geometry assumptions and peculiar velocities \'97 is what makes MCP epistemologically distinctive. It's checking different physics than every other H\uc0\u8320  measurement on the figure.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs36 \cf0 What MCP 
\f3\i is
\f1\i0  limited by\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 The actual systematics:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 1. Peculiar velocity corrections (dominant).
\f0\b0  Pesce+20 quote PV-related variation as \'b12 km/s/Mpc, the largest single systematic in their error budget. Solutions: more galaxies (to average down), or better local-volume PV models (improving \'97 DESI's peculiar velocity reconstructions and the new generation of bulk-flow estimates help here).\

\f1\b 2. Disk geometric model assumptions.
\f0\b0  Real maser disks are not perfectly Keplerian, perfectly thin, perfectly edge-on, or perfectly axisymmetric. Modeling captures the leading deviations (warp, eccentricity, finite thickness), but residual model uncertainty is real and contributes ~1\'962% per galaxy. NGC 4258's 1.1% precision suggests this is well-controlled for the best-studied disk.\

\f1\b 3. Black hole mass priors.
\f0\b0  The disk model jointly determines BH mass and distance; tighter BH mass constraints from independent methods would help, but for most MCP galaxies the BH mass and distance are co-determined.\

\f1\b 4. VLBA absolute astrometry.
\f0\b0  Position measurements rely on tying the maser positions to extragalactic reference frames; current precision is well below the sub-mas mapping precision needed.\
None of these has a clear path to systematic underestimation by factors of order unity. So while MCP's individual precision is ~3.0 km/s/Mpc, it's hard to imagine the central value being off by more than ~5 km/s/Mpc \'97 i.e., MCP's 73.9 is unlikely to be hiding a true value below ~69 or above ~79.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs36 \cf0 How MCP fits into the H\uc0\u8320  tension story\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 There are two complementary roles, both worth being explicit about:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 Role 1: NGC 4258 as the geometric anchor.
\f0\b0  This is the most impactful use of MCP physics in the H\uc0\u8320  tension. Every Pop-I and Pop-II ladder we've discussed (SH0ES Cepheid, CCHP TRGB, EDD TRGB, Mira, JAGB, Pop-II via SBF) uses NGC 4258's MCP-derived distance as one of the geometric anchors. The 1.1% NGC 4258 distance is the 
\f1\b single most important calibration input
\f0\b0  in the modern distance-ladder field, alongside the LMC DEB distance.\
This means MCP physics enters the SH0ES result, the CCHP result, the Pop-II via SBF result, and many others \'97 they all share the NGC 4258 anchor systematic. If MCP-derived NGC 4258 distance shifts (e.g., from a future re-analysis with better acceleration data), every NGC 4258-anchored H\uc0\u8320  value shifts proportionally. The current 1.1% precision corresponds to ~0.8 km/s/Mpc shared systematic across the network.\

\f1\b Role 2: MCP standalone H\uc0\u8320  via Hubble-flow disks.
\f0\b0  This is the weaker but qualitatively important role. The 73.9 \'b1 3.0 is too imprecise to drive H\uc0\u8320  inference on its own \'97 but it's a fully independent cross-check that doesn't share any rungs with anything else. Its agreement with SH0ES (73.04 \'b1 1.04) at the 0.3\u963  level is informative beyond what its formal error bar suggests.\
The conceptual point: if SH0ES were "secretly biased high by 6 km/s/Mpc due to Cepheid systematics" (the strongest version of the CCHP-style critique), MCP would have to be biased the same way \'97 and it can't be, because MCP doesn't use Cepheids. So MCP's standalone result effectively rules out a large class of single-method-systematic resolutions to the H\uc0\u8320  tension.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs36 \cf0 The galaxies in the sample\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 For completeness, since you asked about masers in cosmology earlier, here's what each MCP galaxy contributes:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 NGC 4258
\f0\b0  (anchor, not a Hubble-flow contributor):\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Distance: 7.58 \'b1 0.11 Mpc (Reid+19)\
\ls3\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Recession velocity too low for direct H\uc0\u8320  contribution (470 km/s, dominated by peculiar motion)\
\ls3\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Role: anchors essentially every distance ladder in the H0DN figure\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 UGC 3789
\f0\b0  (Reid+13):\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Distance: ~50 Mpc\
\ls4\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The first non-NGC 4258 MCP distance measurement; demonstrated the method works at Hubble-flow distances.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 NGC 6264
\f0\b0  (Kuo+13):\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Distance: ~144 Mpc\
\ls5\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The most distant MCP target; tests the method at large redshift.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 NGC 6323
\f0\b0  (Kuo+15):\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls6\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Distance: ~107 Mpc\
\ls6\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 A challenging system with a less-symmetric maser disk; modeling required more elaborate disk geometry.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 NGC 5765b
\f0\b0  (Gao+16):\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls7\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Distance: ~126 Mpc\
\ls7\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 One of the cleaner systems; well-defined maser distribution.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 CGCG 074-064
\f0\b0  (Pesce+20):\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls8\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Distance: ~88 Mpc\
\ls8\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The most recent MCP distance; included in Pesce+20's combined H\uc0\u8320  analysis.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 This is the entire usable sample after ~25 years of MCP operation. The sample size is the binding constraint on MCP precision \'97 and there's no clear path to dramatic sample expansion before the ngVLA era (~2035+).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs36 \cf0 Future trajectory\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 What plausibly changes for MCP over the next decade:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 1. Continued monitoring
\f0\b0  of the existing 6 galaxies will tighten distances. Acceleration measurements improve with the square root of monitoring time, so doubling the baseline (~5 more years of GBT + VLBA observations) tightens per-galaxy distance precision by ~30%. Combined with the existing PV systematic, this might bring the standalone MCP H\uc0\u8320  from \'b13.0 to ~\'b12.5. Useful but not transformative.\

\f1\b 2. New megamaser searches
\f0\b0  with more sensitive single-dish instruments could find more disks. The pre-ngVLA era likely sees ~1\'962 new MCP-quality systems added; ngVLA itself (with ~10\'d7 sensitivity at 22 GHz) might add ~10+ systems over its operational lifetime.\

\f1\b 3. Improved peculiar velocity models.
\f0\b0  DESI's redshift-space distortion data and new bulk-flow reconstructions are improving the local PV field substantially. Within ~5 years, the per-galaxy PV uncertainty for MCP targets could drop from \'b1250 km/s to \'b1150 km/s. This alone would tighten MCP H\uc0\u8320  to ~\'b12.0.\

\f1\b 4. The ngVLA-era projection.
\f0\b0  With ~30 megamaser disks suitable for VLBI mapping (the optimistic ngVLA-era projection) and improved PV models, MCP could plausibly reach 1\'962% standalone H\uc0\u8320  precision by ~2040. This would make it competitive with SH0ES on its own terms \'97 geometric, ladder-free, completely independent.\
For your EDE-relevant timescale (paper this year, future work over the next few years), the practical state of MCP is roughly fixed. The 73.9 \'b1 3.0 standalone value will tighten modestly but won't transform. The NGC 4258 anchor will tighten somewhat but won't transform either. So MCP enters your inference as a relatively stable, modestly informative likelihood that mostly does its work via the NGC 4258 anchor on other measurements.\
}