{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f4\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Parallax
\f1\b0  is the apparent shift in a star's position against background sources as the Earth orbits the Sun \'97 the most direct distance measurement in all of astronomy, and the 
\f0\b third geometric anchor
\f1\b0  at the bottom of the H0DN distance ladder alongside DEBs and masers.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 The geometry, in one breath\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Earth's orbit has a baseline of 2 AU. As Earth moves from one side of the Sun to the other (six months apart), a nearby star appears to shift against more distant background stars by an angle $2p$, where $p$ is the 
\f0\b parallax angle
\f1\b0 . The distance is then trivially:\
$$d = \\frac\{1 \\text\{ AU\}\}\{p\}$$\
If $p$ is in arcseconds and $d$ is in parsecs, this becomes the famously simple $d \\text\{ [pc]\} = 1/p \\text\{ ["]\}$. (The parsec is 
\f2\i defined
\f1\i0  this way \'97 "parsec" = "parallax of one arcsecond.")\
There is 
\f0\b nothing else
\f1\b0  to it. No standard candle, no calibration, no luminosity assumption, no model atmosphere, no stellar physics whatsoever. You measure an angle and you have a distance. This is why parallax is, conceptually, the most fundamental distance technique \'97 every other method on the H0DN figure ultimately traces back to parallax-calibrated stars somewhere in its history.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 The catch: the angles are tiny\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 A star at 1 pc would have $p = 1$ arcsecond. There are no stars within 1 pc of the Sun (Proxima Centauri, the closest, is at 1.3 pc). At cosmologically interesting distances:\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth3039\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth896\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1353\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Object\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Distance\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Parallax\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth3039\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth896\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1353\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 Proxima Centauri\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 1.3 pc\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 770 mas\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth3039\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth896\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1353\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \uc0\u945  Centauri\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 1.3 pc\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 750 mas\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth3039\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth896\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1353\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Nearest Cepheids (e.g., Polaris)\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 ~130 pc\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 ~7.5 mas\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth3039\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth896\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1353\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Typical SH0ES MW Cepheids\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 ~1\'964 kpc\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 250\'961000 \uc0\u956 as\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth3039\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth896\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1353\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 LMC\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 50 kpc\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 20 \uc0\u956 as\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth3039\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth896\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1353\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 NGC 4258\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 7.6 Mpc\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 0.13 \uc0\u956 as\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The numbers tell the story. 
\f0\b Cosmologically useful parallaxes require microarcsecond precision
\f1\b0  \'97 this is hard, expensive, and only became possible with space-based astrometry. Direct parallaxes to extragalactic targets (LMC and beyond) are 
\f2\i not
\f1\i0  practical even with current technology \'97 Gaia hits its precision floor at ~10\'9620 kpc. So parallax in cosmology means 
\f0\b parallax to Milky Way stars, used to anchor the second-rung distance indicators that are then applied extragalactically
\f1\b0 .\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 The Gaia revolution\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Pre-Gaia, parallax was a marginal contributor to extragalactic distance work. 
\f0\b Hipparcos
\f1\b0  (ESA, 1989\'961993) achieved ~1 mas precision for ~10
\f3 \uc0\u8309 
\f1  stars, useful for MW Cepheids only at the brightest end and with significant systematic uncertainty in the Cepheid PLR zero point. The Hipparcos Cepheid sample disagreed with HST observations of the LMC at the ~5% level for decades, and there was no clean way to resolve it.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Gaia
\f1\b0  (ESA, 2013\'96) has changed this completely:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Gaia DR2
\f1\b0  (2018): ~0.04 mas at G = 15\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Gaia EDR3
\f1\b0  (2020): ~0.02\'960.03 mas at G = 15, with significantly improved systematics\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Gaia DR3
\f1\b0  (2022): same astrometry as EDR3 plus much more\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Gaia DR4
\f1\b0  (expected ~2026): ~30% improvement on parallaxes\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Gaia DR5
\f1\b0  (final, ~2030+): final mission catalog, parallax precision floor\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 For SH0ES, the relevant data are EDR3 parallaxes of ~75 well-studied 
\f0\b Milky Way Cepheids
\f1\b0  with periods spanning the relevant range. These provide the third geometric anchor for the Cepheid PLR alongside NGC 4258 and the LMC.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 The Gaia parallax zero-point problem\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Now for the wrinkle that makes Gaia parallaxes harder than they sound \'97 and that has been the subject of a small industry of papers since 2018.\
Gaia measures parallaxes by repeatedly observing stars from different positions along Earth's L2 orbit. The astrometric solution involves a complex global fit that determines stellar positions, proper motions, and parallaxes simultaneously, plus calibration parameters describing the spacecraft's attitude and instrumental response.\
It turns out the global solution has a 
\f0\b non-zero zero-point offset
\f1\b0  \'97 Gaia parallaxes are systematically biased by roughly $-17$ to $-30$ \uc0\u956 as (varying with magnitude, color, and ecliptic latitude), meaning measured parallaxes are too small (so inferred distances are too large) by that amount. This was discovered by comparing Gaia parallaxes of QSOs (which should have $p = 0$ to micro-microarcsecond precision) with Gaia's measurements of the same QSOs.\
The zero-point offset is the 
\f0\b dominant systematic
\f1\b0  for Gaia-anchored Cepheid distances, because for Cepheids at typical distances of 1\'964 kpc, the parallax is 250\'961000 \uc0\u956 as \'97 and a 20 \u956 as offset is a 2\'968% bias.\
Several groups have produced corrections:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Lindegren et al. 2021
\f1\b0 : an empirical correction model built into Gaia EDR3, calibrated on QSOs, eclipsing binaries, and LMC/SMC stars. Most pipelines apply this by default.\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Riess et al. 2021
\f1\b0 : an independent measurement using Cepheids in the same fields as the anchor sample, finding $-14$ \uc0\u956 as residual offset 
\f2\i after
\f1\i0  the Lindegren correction \'97 meaning Lindegren overcorrects slightly for the Cepheid sample specifically.\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Groenewegen 2021
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b Zinn 2021
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b Khan et al. 2023
\f1\b0 , others: cross-checks using red clump giants, asteroseismic distances, eclipsing binaries \'97 broadly consistent with $-15$ to $-30$ \uc0\u956 as offsets, with some color/magnitude dependence.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The H0DN paper handles all of this by carrying the Gaia zero-point as a nuisance parameter with prior, marginalized over in the full fit. For SH0ES specifically, R22 quotes the Gaia anchor as contributing ~0.5 km/s/Mpc to the H
\f3 \uc0\u8320 
\f1  uncertainty after corrections \'97 comparable to but not dominant over the LMC and NGC 4258 anchors.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Where parallax sits in the H0DN figure\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 In the figure, "parallax" labels the leftmost geometric anchor at the bottom \'97 the Milky Way, supplying distances to 
\f0\b individual MW Cepheids
\f1\b0  that the SH0ES Cepheid PLR uses for absolute calibration. Unlike NGC 4258 and the LMC (each a single host galaxy with its own population of secondary tracers), the MW supplies parallaxes to many individual stars across many directions, which then collectively constrain the Cepheid PLR zero point.\
So the conceptual structure is:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 NGC 4258
\f1\b0 : maser distance 
\f4 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  Cepheids/TRGB/Miras 
\f2\i in NGC 4258
\f1\i0  
\f4 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  calibrate PLR/tip 
\f0\b LMC
\f1\b0 : DEB distance 
\f4 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  Cepheids/TRGB/JAGB 
\f2\i in LMC
\f1\i0  
\f4 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  calibrate PLR/tip 
\f0\b MW
\f1\b0 : parallax to 
\f2\i individual
\f1\i0  Cepheids 
\f4 \uc0\u8594 
\f1  calibrate PLR (Cepheid-only)\
Parallax uniquely calibrates Cepheids and not the other Pop-II tracers, because TRGB/JAGB/Miras can't be cleanly identified and parallax-measured for individual MW stars (TRGB needs population statistics; Miras have their own complications with circumstellar dust). So the parallax anchor is fundamentally a Cepheid-only contribution to the network \'97 which is why on the figure it feeds specifically into the Cepheid-Pop-I rung.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 A subtler but important parallax contribution: open cluster Cepheids\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Beyond field MW Cepheids, Gaia provides 
\f0\b parallaxes to ~30 open clusters that contain Cepheids
\f1\b0 . These give indirect Cepheid distances via cluster membership \'97 and importantly, the cluster mean parallax is much more precise than any individual member because you're averaging over many stars at the same distance.\
Cluster Cepheid distances have somewhat different systematics from field Cepheid parallaxes (membership selection, cluster depth) and provide an internal cross-check. 
\f0\b Breuval et al. 2020, 2022
\f1\b0  show good agreement between field-Cepheid and cluster-Cepheid parallax-derived PLR zero points, increasing confidence in the parallax anchor overall.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 The Cepheid-specific advantage of parallax\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 There's a feature of the parallax anchor that's worth being explicit about because it interacts cleanly with the H
\f3 \uc0\u8320 
\f1  tension debate:\
The parallax anchor allows the Cepheid PLR to be calibrated 
\f0\b with no extragalactic step at all
\f1\b0 . NGC 4258 requires trusting the maser-disk geometric model. The LMC requires trusting the DEB SBC relation. The MW parallax requires only trusting Gaia's astrometric solution and the zero-point correction.\
If the parallax-anchored Cepheid PLR gives the same H
\f3 \uc0\u8320 
\f1  (within errors) as the NGC 4258-anchored PLR and the LMC DEB-anchored PLR \'97 which it does \'97 then any systematic that proposes to bring SH0ES down to Planck values has to operate on 
\f0\b all three anchors simultaneously and consistently
\f1\b0 . That's a very tall order. Each anchor has its own failure modes; no single failure mode plausibly affects all three the same way.\
This is essentially why the SH0ES error bars are as small as they are: the three-anchor consistency forces the systematics down. Pre-Gaia, when the parallax anchor was effectively useless (Hipparcos error bars too large), SH0ES quoted ~3% precision. Post-Gaia EDR3 with the three-anchor calibration, R22 quotes 1.4% precision.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Beyond cosmology: what Gaia parallax is good for in adjacent areas\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Worth knowing because some of these feed into H
\f3 \uc0\u8320 
\f1  work indirectly:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 RR Lyrae PLR calibration
\f1\b0  (Pop-II tracer, used in some lower-rung work)\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 TRGB calibration in MW globular clusters
\f1\b0  (Pop-II), with parallaxes to GCs themselves or to TRGB stars in the closest GCs\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Mira PLR zero point in MW field
\f1\b0  (Bhardwaj+24 used this for the three-anchor Mira solution that gave H
\f3 \uc0\u8320 
\f1  = 73.06)\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Supernova progenitor distances
\f1\b0  (some nearby SN II progenitors have direct Gaia parallaxes pre-explosion)\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Local group geometry
\f1\b0  (LMC + SMC + dwarf spheroidal proper motions) for understanding the PV field around the MW\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Future: what changes the parallax anchor\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 The big upcoming changes:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Gaia DR4 (~2026)
\f1\b0 : ~30% improvement in parallax precision plus better systematic characterization. The zero-point situation will improve further; expect Cepheid PLR zero point uncertainty to drop by ~25%.\
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Gaia DR5 (final, ~2030+)
\f1\b0 : end-of-mission catalog with the full ~10.5-year baseline. Roughly 2\'d7 improvement over EDR3.\
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 JASMINE and Theia and concept missions for IR astrometry
\f1\b0 : would extend parallax work into dust-obscured Galactic plane regions where Gaia is weak. Distant cosmological impact.\
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Roman Space Telescope's astrometric program
\f1\b0 : not designed primarily for parallax but contributes for some target lists.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The plausible end-state is a Gaia-final-mission Cepheid PLR with parallax-anchor uncertainty well under 1%, making the Cepheid PLR essentially as well-calibrated as it can practically be without going extragalactic. If at that point SH0ES still gives H
\f3 \uc0\u8320 
\f1  \uc0\u8776  73 and Planck still gives 67.4, the tension survives the most natural "fix the calibration" rescue.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Summary \

\f1\b0\fs24 Three quick takeaways:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	1	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Parallax is the only anchor that doesn't go extragalactic.
\f1\b0  Its systematics (Gaia zero-point) are completely orthogonal to the systematics of the other two anchors (maser-disk geometry, DEB SBC). For your covariance treatment, treat it as effectively independent of NGC 4258 and the LMC.\
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	2	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Parallax only feeds the Cepheid rung.
\f1\b0  Pop-II ladders (TRGB, JAGB, Mira-via-NGC 4258) don't use the MW parallax anchor in any direct way. So if you're partitioning the H0DN measurements into anchor-blocks, parallax goes only with SH0ES-Cepheid, not with CCHP/EDD/Pop-II.\
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	3	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The three-anchor consistency is the structural argument for SH0ES robustness.
\f1\b0  You can ask whether the LMC distance is wrong, or whether the maser disk model is wrong, or whether Gaia has a residual zero-point \'97 but you can't sensibly argue all three are wrong by exactly the same amount in the same direction. That's the systematics-resistance that lets SH0ES quote 1% precision on H
\f3 \uc0\u8320 
\f1  and have it survive a decade of scrutiny.\
}