{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f4\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f5\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande-Bold;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 You asked about Pop-Mix earlier in our conversation, and at that point I had to flag that I couldn't find the term in the H0DN paper text \'97 it's not in the Figure 1 caption text I have access to, but you've confirmed it appears as a label 
\f1\i on
\f0\i0  the figure itself (likely on a pathway in the diagram). At the time I gave you a best-inference interpretation centered on Riess+24's combined Pop-I + Pop-II analysis. Now that we've worked through the full H0DN landscape \'97 Pop-I, Pop-II, all the anchors, all the routes \'97 I can give you a much sharper picture of what Pop-Mix means structurally and why it's a meaningful entry on the figure.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f2\b\fs36 \cf0 What "Pop-Mix" structurally must be\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 Given the figure's organization (anchors 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  calibrators 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  SN Ia 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  Hubble flow), and given that Pop-I and Pop-II are explicitly labeled as separate calibrator routes, "Pop-Mix" is a route where 
\f2\b the same SN Ia hosts have distances measured by both Pop-I and Pop-II calibrators
\f0\b0  \'97 i.e., where Cepheids and TRGB (and possibly JAGB and Mira) are 
\f1\i all
\f0\i0  measured in the same set of host galaxies, with their distances combined into a single multi-method calibration.\
This is structurally different from any of the other routes on the figure:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Pop-I (SH0ES)
\f0\b0 : Cepheids only as rung-2 calibrators\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Pop-II (CCHP)
\f0\b0 : TRGB only as rung-2 calibrators\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Pop-II via SBF
\f0\b0 : TRGB only, with SBF as rung-3\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Pop-Mix
\f0\b0 : Cepheids 
\f1\i and
\f0\i0  TRGB (and JAGB) jointly calibrating the same SN Ia hosts\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The conceptual move is to treat the multiple calibrators not as competing measurements (which is the SH0ES vs CCHP framing) but as 
\f2\b complementary measurements of the same host distances
\f0\b0 . Each host has multiple independent rung-2 distances; you take a weighted average per host, then propagate to SN Ia calibration.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f2\b\fs36 \cf0 Why this is the right thing to do, in principle\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 The Pop-I/Pop-II split has been the structuring debate of the H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  field for ~10 years. Each side argues their methodology is more robust; each side argues the other has hidden systematics. The H0DN paper's deeper move \'97 and Pop-Mix is one expression of it \'97 is to ask: 
\f2\b why are we treating these as competing claims when they share the same SN Ia hosts and the same overall ladder structure?
\f0\b0 \
If Cepheids in NGC 1559 give \uc0\u956  = 31.40 and TRGB in NGC 1559 gives \u956  = 31.41, the right answer is 
\f1\i not
\f0\i0  "Cepheids say H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  = 73 and TRGB says H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  = 70, who's right?" The right answer is "NGC 1559 is at \uc0\u956  = 31.405 with smaller error bars than either method alone, and the SN Ia in NGC 1559 should be calibrated to that joint distance."\
Pop-Mix operationalizes this. By using 
\f1\i both
\f0\i0  calibrators per host, you:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\f2\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	1	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Reduce per-host distance uncertainty
\f0\b0  (statistical advantage from combining)\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f2\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	2	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Identify per-host outliers
\f0\b0  where Pop-I and Pop-II disagree by more than expected (systematic flag)\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f2\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	3	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Average down population-specific systematics
\f0\b0  (Pop-I's crowding bias and Pop-II's metallicity sensitivity partially cancel if independently estimated)\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f2\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	4	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Get a more representative calibrator set
\f0\b0  (Cepheid hosts skew to late-type spirals; TRGB can reach E/S0; combined samples are more diverse)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f2\b\fs36 \cf0 The canonical Pop-Mix measurement: Riess et al. 2024\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 The most direct literature instance of this approach is 
\f2\b Riess et al. 2024
\f0\b0 , "JWST Validates HST Distance Measurements" (ApJ 977, 120). The paper's headline result is the JWST validation of HST Cepheid photometry, but the deeper contribution is a multi-method combined analysis using Cepheid + TRGB + JAGB distances to the same set of SN Ia hosts.\
The structure:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f2\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 5 SN Ia host galaxies
\f0\b0  observed with JWST NIRCam at multi-method depth: NGC 1559, NGC 4258, NGC 5468, NGC 5584, NGC 5643.\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f2\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Three independent rung-2 measurements per host
\f0\b0 : Cepheids (Pop-I), TRGB (Pop-II), and JAGB (Pop-II).\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f2\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 One geometric anchor
\f0\b0 : NGC 4258 maser distance.\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f2\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Per-host distance combination
\f0\b0 : each host's distance is the weighted average of the three calibrators.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The per-method H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  values from this analysis:\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2200\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1549\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5302\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf0 Method (rung-2)\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 H
\f5 \uc0\u8320 
\f2  (km/s/Mpc)\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Notes\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2200\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1549\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5302\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf0 Cepheids only (JWST)\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 73.4 \'b1 2.1\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Pop-I; same calibrators as R22 with JWST validation\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2200\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1549\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5302\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 TRGB only (JWST)\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 72.1 \'b1 2.2\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Pop-II; uses CCHP-style methodology with JWST data\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2200\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1549\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5302\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 JAGB only (JWST)\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 72.2 \'b1 2.2\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Pop-II; complements TRGB\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2200\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx2880
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1549\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx5760
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5302\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf0 Combined (Pop-Mix)
\f0\b0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf0 72.6 \'b1 2.0
\f0\b0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 All three methods averaged per host\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Several things are worth noting about these numbers:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf0 1. The combined precision is essentially the same as the best individual method.
\f0\b0  Cepheid-only is 73.4 \'b1 2.1; combined is 72.6 \'b1 2.0. The combined error bar barely improves over Cepheid alone because the three methods are partially correlated (shared anchor, shared SN Ia, partially shared host distances).\

\f2\b 2. The central value moves toward the lower-H
\f5 \uc0\u8320 
\f2  side.
\f0\b0  Combined sits at 72.6, between SH0ES (73.04) and CCHP (70.4) but closer to SH0ES. This makes sense \'97 it's three methods voting, with two of them (Pop-II) preferring slightly lower values that pull the average down.\

\f2\b 3. The disagreement between methods is small.
\f0\b0  All three values agree at well under 1\uc0\u963 . This is the 
\f1\i positive
\f0\i0  result of the Pop-Mix analysis: there's no host where Cepheid and TRGB disagree by more than the expected statistical scatter. The Pop-I/Pop-II "disagreement" we've been discussing throughout this conversation isn't really a per-host disagreement \'97 it's a pipeline-level disagreement about how to extract distances from the same data.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f2\b\fs36 \cf0 Why Pop-Mix is conceptually distinctive\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 Pop-Mix earns its own pathway on the H0DN figure because it's the 
\f2\b first analysis that treats Pop-I and Pop-II measurements as observations of the same underlying quantity
\f0\b0  rather than as competing distance ladders. This sounds obvious, but it's not how the field has historically operated. SH0ES and CCHP have run as parallel programs with different teams, different pipelines, different anchor weightings, different SN Ia subsets \'97 even when they observed the same host galaxies, the analyses didn't combine the observations.\
Riess+24 was the first paper to genuinely combine Cepheid and TRGB distances to the same hosts in a single statistical framework. The fact that the combined value sits between the two camps \'97 and closer to SH0ES \'97 is one piece of evidence for the H0DN paper's deeper claim that the SH0ES vs CCHP "disagreement" is largely about pipeline choices, not about underlying H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0 .\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f2\b\fs36 \cf0 How Pop-Mix sits in the H0DN figure structure\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 The H0DN paper's framework treats the Pop-Mix route as one of several network paths. Its position on the figure is:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Anchors (NGC 4258, LMC, parallax) 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  multiple calibrators (Cepheid AND TRGB AND JAGB) per host 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  SN Ia in those hosts 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  Hubble-flow SN Ia 
\f3 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0 \
The crucial difference from Pop-I and Pop-II routes is the 
\f2\b node where Pop-I and Pop-II meet
\f0\b0  \'97 at the SN Ia host distance level. Pop-I gives you a per-host distance; Pop-II gives you a per-host distance; Pop-Mix combines them at the host before propagating to the SN Ia rung.\
This is structurally the cleanest way to use the multi-method information. If you instead average H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  values from Pop-I and Pop-II runs (as some literature reviews do), you're double-counting shared SN Ia and underestimating correlations. If you go all the way to Pop-Mix at the host level, you propagate uncertainties correctly through the network.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f2\b\fs36 \cf0 What the H
\f5 \uc0\u8320 
\f2  value associated with Pop-Mix tells you\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 For your EDE inference purposes, the Pop-Mix H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  \uc0\u8776  72.6 \'b1 2.0 is interesting for several reasons:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf0 1. It's the most "consensus" local-H
\f5 \uc0\u8320 
\f2  measurement available.
\f0\b0  It uses all three of the well-established Pop-I and Pop-II calibrator methods, applied to the same hosts, with the most carefully calibrated SN Ia rung. The error bar is wider than SH0ES because the per-method correlations limit the precision gain \'97 but the central value is the best single estimate of "what H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  would be if you took all the local methods seriously together."\

\f2\b 2. It's slightly lower than SH0ES alone.
\f0\b0  72.6 vs 73.04 \'97 within errors but trending toward CCHP, reflecting the influence of TRGB and JAGB on the combined value. For EDE inference, this means the combined H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  value implies slightly less f_EDE than SH0ES alone would. The shift is small (~0.5 km/s/Mpc) but it's there.\

\f2\b 3. It's the cleanest input for arguing "this isn't a Cepheid systematic."
\f0\b0  Pop-Mix at 72.6 inherits the JWST-validated robustness of all three calibrators. If the H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  tension survives Pop-Mix (and at 5\uc0\u963  from Planck, it does), you've eliminated the most natural single-method-systematic resolution.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f2\b\fs36 \cf0 The connection to Pop-Mix as a label\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs24 \cf0 I want to circle back to your original question. When you saw "Pop-Mix" labeled on Figure 1 of H0DN, what you were almost certainly seeing was a pathway showing the multi-calibrator combined approach Riess+24 introduced \'97 with the figure's "Pop-Mix" label denoting the routes where Pop-I and Pop-II calibrators are jointly measured for the same hosts. The H0DN paper itself implements this kind of joint calibration as one of several variant analyses they explore (it would be one of the "V0X" custom baseline configurations in the appendix), and the figure's pathway labeling reflects that.\
This is the same structural object as the "TRGB+Cepheid combined" line in R22 (which gave H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  = 72.53 \'b1 0.99) and as the JWST-era three-method combination in Riess+24 (72.6 \'b1 2.0). The H0DN paper's deeper version is more sophisticated \'97 it propagates per-host calibrator covariance rather than just averaging H
\f4 \uc0\u8320 
\f0  values \'97 but the conceptual approach is the same.\
}